Validation of Tax-Calculator Logic
==================================

Tax-Calculator computes USA federal income and payroll taxes for a
sample of tax filing units in years beginning with 2013.  The Python
code that performs the tax calculations has been validated in several
ways.  During the course of development Tax-Calculator results for a
number of filing units have been compared to hand calculations
performed using IRS tax forms and instructions.  In addition, a more
systematic program of cross-model validation is part of the ongoing
development effort.

The premise behind cross-model validation work is that independently
developed tax-simulation models or tax-preparation software are
unlikely to contain the same bug, which means looking for differences
between the output from two models using the same input is an
effective way to locate bugs in tax-calculation logic.

The tools included in this directory support the following validation
work flow:

  1. Generate a random sample of tax filing units (INPUT).
  2. Generate OUTPUT from INPUT using Tax-Calculator.
  3. Obtain OUTPUT from INPUT generated by another tax program.
  4. Generate tax differences by comparing the two OUTPUT files.

The working assumption in our cross-model validation work is that tax
differences are more likely than not to be caused by bugs in
Tax-Calculator.  If exploration of specific differences do confirm a
bug, it is corrected and the four-step validation process is repeated
again until there are no meaningful differences in the two OUTPUT
files.

This four-step validation process can be repeated for different sized
INPUT files that vary in the number of input variables used to specify
each filing unit's attributes and in the number of filing units
included in the INPUT file.  A more extensive list of input variables
and a larger number of filing units increase the likelihood of finding
cross-model differences.  In our work, each INPUT file is generated
randomly to insure a wide range of filing unit attributes.

Other Tax Programs Used for Cross-Model Validation
--------------------------------------------------

Our goal is to repeat the four-step cross-model validation process
described above using more than one other tax program with which to
compare Tax-Calculator results.  The details and results of the
four-step process are provided in a different sub-directory for each
other model.  Here are links to the cross-model validation results
that are currently available:

[Internet TAXSIM-27](https://github.com/PSLmodels/Tax-Calculator/blob/master/taxcalc/validation/taxsim27/README.md#validation-of-tax-calculator-against-internet-taxsim-27)

[...]()


Details on Using the Validation Tools
-------------------------------------

The current version of the validation tools in this directory tree
should work on Linux or Mac OS X without any changes and without
adding any extra software.  Those who want to use these validation
tools on Windows will have to do three things: (a) install an AWK
interpreter, (b) install a Tcl interpreter, and (c) translate each
`tests.sh` and `test.sh` bash script into a Windows batch file.  The
Free Software Foundation provides a free AWK interpreter for Windows
(`gawk.exe`).  ActiveState provides a free Tcl interpreter for Windows
(`tclsh.exe`).
